---
layout: post
title: Nürnberg
---

Nina surprised me last weekend with a trip to Nürnberg for my birthday.  I've
been wanting to go for months, so it was a wonderful gift.  Although most
Americans are only familiar with the city's Nazi history -- first the rallies,
then the war trials -- Nürnberg was once one of the most important cities in
Europe, as both an important center of trade and and later as one of the
principal cities of the Holy Roman Empire.  It was well-maintained and
well-fortified, and although Americans bombed it flat a few decades ago, enough
of the structure and memories remained that a visit today will reward the
traveler with a beautiful and fascinating medieval old town.

One of the most striking things about German towns, as an American, is that
German medieval architecture doesn't match our fairytale imagingings.  The
dominant style in medieval Germany was the Romanesque, not the Gothic, having
been well-established by late-early-middle-ages German kingdoms, who provided
some of the first pan-European governments to the post-Roman era.  Besides,
they had more brick than stone.  The result is a different color and shape:
redder and rounder than the English or French gray and blocky.

[![square][]][square]
[![market][]][market]

[![skyline][]][skyline]
[![pegnitz][]][pegnitz]


Two things that are not to be missed:

1.  **Nürnberger Bratwurst**.  These are famous, at least in the sense that
everyone to whom I've mentioned Nürnberg in the eight months we've lived in
Munich has mentioned them.  In fact, that's the only thing they've mentioned.
I'm not entirely sure how firm a grasp other Europeans have of German history.  These sausages will immediately remind the American of our ubiquitous "breakfast sausages."  Don't worry, though: these are delicious.  They're spicy in the German sense; that is, they have the audacity to contain spices.

2.  **Kaiserburg, the Imperial Castle**.  This was one of the most important
castles of the Holy Roman Emperor, at least while that position was still an
elected title and not a Habsburg inheritance.  Somehow I managed to avoid
taking a decent photo of the castle by itself, but I did get a good one looking
up out of the dry moat, which conveniently served that weekend as the site of a
medieval festival.  Keep reading, intrepid traveler, for details of that
adventure!  

    The castle sits on a hill overlooking the city, and consists of walls, a
palace, several other castle-type buildings, a tower, and a courtyard, all
beautifully renovated since the war.  The palace is now a very nice museum
filled with historical trinkets and explanatory placards.  The stable just
outside the castle walls now houses a newly-renovated youth hostel; you, too,
can travel around Germany, sleeping in castles, pretending to be the Holy Roman
Emperor during his perpetual wanderings and pretendings at having a real Empire.


[![moat][]][moat]

Our trip happily coincided with a "mittelalter" festival being held in the
castle's dry moat.  This is, as far as I can tell, identical to the American
"Renaissance Festival," but with a more appropriate name and the fact that it's
held adjacent to a genuine castle and not in a dusty field in the suburbs of
Georgia.  I'm a big fan of anachronism, and of course the castle is the natural
place to hold such a festival if you happen to live near one, but there is
something somehow more amusing about fake knights walking around in a real
moat.  Anyway, there were the usual merchants in period-appropriate vestiments
peddling artisinal handicrafts, lots sausages and beer, bagpipe bands,
fire-eaters, knightly tournaments, and so on.  I had my first experience with
mead, which is delicious, and really does taste like honey.

Keeping with the theme of poetic license, we watched a play that had King
Arthur facing off against Don Pedro to pull the Sword from the Stone, only to
be upstaged by an old woman.  Guinevere was ghastly.  It was a spectacle.


[square]: /img/nuremberg/square.jpg  "Square with cafés and shops"
[market]: /img/nuremberg/market.jpg  "Craft market"
[skyline]: /img/nuremberg/skyline.jpg  "City skyline from the castle"
[pegnitz]: /img/nuremberg/pegnitz.jpg  "Pegnitz river through the city"
[moat]: /img/nuremberg/moat.jpg  "Castle moat approaching the medieval fest"
