---
layout: post
title: "Advent of Code 2019: Running Commentary"
date: 2019-11-25
permalink: /advent-of-code-2019.html
---

Next month marks seven years that I've been at Google, not counting the two
internships. That's seven years since I last went on an interview, and seven
years since I last cared about algorithm design and coding challenges. I've
occasionally spent a weekend on a side project -- mostly Sudoku solvers and Lisp
interpreters, my standard projects for learning a new language -- but mostly I
go to work, where I try to fit bits of code into enormously complex systems and
occasionally refactor them somewhat, and go home, where I do something
completely unrelated, like read German or cook.

After a burnout episode earlier this year, the details of which I'll omit, I
decided to get back in touch with programming outside of the day-to-day grind of
fiddling in million-line codebases. I considered applying to the [Recurse
Center](https://www.recurse.com), but it turns out that rent and childcare are
too expensive for me to justify taking twelve weeks off without pay. Somewhere I
stumbled across [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com), and I'm a huge
sucker for holiday-themed stuff like this, so I'm giving it a shot.

I'm writing the solutions in Go, even though Rust would be my first choice. I
spent several months with Rust earlier this year, and I fully expect it to
transform the development of safe and performant large systems, but when I went
back recently to some of the code I'd written just a few months ago, I couldn't
understand a thing. Trying to write something new was as painful as if I'd never
used it at all. Becoming proficient again in Go, by contrast -- which I last
used nontrivially in [2012](https://github.com/dhconnelly/rtreego) -- took about
two days. I'm hoping to come back to Rust next year.

I'll try to solve each problem on the day it appears and then write about it,
updating this post as I go. Good luck to everyone else participating!
